# Migrating a project referencing finmath-lib from 4.0.x or 4.1.x to 5.0.0 (or higher).

## Java 11

finmath lib 5.0 will move to Java 11 as default. Java 8 is available as a Maven profile (`-Pjava8`). For some time Java 8 compatible code will be maintained in `src/main/java8`.

## Refactorings

Version 5 of finmath-lib has been refactored in some aspects. An overview can be found in `docs/refactoring-4.1.x-to-5.0.0/Refactorings 4.1.x to 5.0.0.xlsx`.

If you have a project which runs with version 4.1.3 of finmath lib then you can switch to
version 4.1.7. In version 4.1.7 methods that are removed in version 5.0.0 are marked as
deprecated with hints on the alternative.

### Monte-Carlo Simulations

#### Model and Process

A process (MonteCarloProcess) needs to know the model (ProcessModel, because the model provides initialValue, drift, factorLoading to the process (Euler scheme), but the model also needed to know the process

Since the numeraire calculation depends on the drift, it is part of the model.

The numeraire is derived from simulated state variables, not in Black-Scholes, but in many other models like Hull-White oder LMM, hence the calculation of the numeraire needs the process.

#### Redesign

In version 4.x this was realized by the model holding a reference to the process.

In version 5.0. the model no longer holds a reference to the process. 

Instead, most methods of the model take the process as a first argument (getDrift(process, timeIndex, xxx)).

The model has to be design to be reuseable with different processes. Caches have to check for a change of the process.

So the way to construct a Monte-Carlo simulation of some model is now as follows:

	var model = new XxxModel(…)

	var td = new TimeDiscretizationXxx(….)
	var brownianMotion = new BrownianMotionXxx(td,…)

	var process = new ProcessEurlerScheme(model, brownianMotion)

	var simulation = new MonteCarloAssetModel(process)

So, the whole dependency structure is linear.

For another example see this Experiment: http://www.finmath.net/finmath-experiments/montecarlo-blackscholes/


#### State Space Transform

The state space transform is allowed to be time dependent, which allows for more efficient numerical schemes.
